# Source PDF: 1-Conditional_Diffusion_Models_for_CT_Image_Synthesis from.pdf
# Pages: 24



--- PAGE 1 ---

Academic Editor: Emilio Quaia
Received: 5 March 2026
Revised: 21 April 2026
Accepted: 28 April 2026
Published: 6 May 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Systematic Review
Conditional Diffusion Models for CT Image Synthesis from
CBCT: A Systematic Review
Alzahra Altalib 1,2,*
 , Chunhui Li 1
 and Alessandro Perelli 3
1 School of Science and Engineering, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 4HN, UK; c.li@dundee.ac.uk
2 Department of Applied Medical Sciences, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid 21410, Jordan
3 School of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Health, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8TA, UK;
alessandro.perelli@glasgow.ac.uk
* Correspondence: 2600129@dundee.ac.uk or ahaltaleb19@ams.just.edu.jo
Simple Summary
Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) is widely used in radiotherapy because it is
fast and relatively low dose, but its image quality is lower than that of conventional CT.
Conditional diffusion models have recently been proposed to convert CBCT into synthetic
CT with improved anatomical detail and more reliable Hounsfield Units. This systematic
review summarizes current CBCT-to-CT synthesis conditional diffusion approaches, their
reported quantitative performance, and their possible clinical relevance. The evidence
is promising but still limited and heterogeneous, highlighting the need for standardized
evaluation, stronger dose-related validation, and larger multi-institutional studies before
broad clinical adoption.
Abstract
Background: Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) is widely used in image-guided
radiotherapy because it provides on-board volumetric imaging at relatively low doses,
but its clinical utility for synthetic CT (sCT) generation remains limited by noise, scatter,
artifacts, and reduced Hounsfield Unit (HU) fidelity. Conditional diffusion models (CDMs)
have recently emerged as a promising alternative to earlier deep learning approaches
because their iterative denoising process may better preserve anatomical structure and
model uncertainty. Objective: This systematic review evaluates the use of conditional
diffusion models for CBCT-to-CT synthesis, with particular attention to architectural strate-
gies, reported quantitative outcomes, and potential clinical relevance. A systematic search
was conducted in PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, IEEE Xplore, and Google Scholar for
studies published between 2013 and 2024. Eleven studies met the eligibility criteria and
were analyzed to address three questions: (1) Which conditional diffusion strategies have
been used? (2) What outcomes have been reported? and (3) What clinical implications
have been discussed? Results: Across the included studies, CDMs frequently showed
promising image quality performance, especially when incorporating anatomical priors,
spatial-frequency guidance, hierarchical refinement, or latent representations. However,
the evidence base remains small and highly heterogeneous with respect to anatomy, di-
mensionality, supervision strategy, and evaluation metrics, limiting the strength of direct
comparative claims. The reviewed literature suggests that conditional diffusion models
are a promising direction for CBCT-to-CT synthesis, but stronger dose-aware validation,
standardized reporting, and broader multicenter evaluation are still needed before routine
clinical deployment. This review has been registered with the International Prospective
Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO), under registration number CRD42024619240.
Tomography 2026, 12, 64 https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 2 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 2 of 24
Keywords: Cone-beam computed tomography; synthetic CT; tomography; X-ray com-
puted; conditional diffusion models; denoising diffusion probabilistic models; radiotherapy
planning; computer assisted
1. Introduction
Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) and computed tomography (CT) are
two of the widely used methods in clinical settings [1]. The CBCT offers a low-radiation
method to provide real-time imaging and is a frequently used technique in image-guided
radiotherapy. Despite having numerous applications, it suffers from increased noise,
artifacts, and lower contrast for the soft tissues [2]. This may reduce its accuracy for the
dose calculations and organ delineation. CT, on the other side, offers higher resolution.
This results in a reliable Hounsfield Unit (HU) accuracy and the achievement of better soft
tissue contrast. Thus, CT is treated as a gold standard for treatment planning. Nevertheless,
CT scans subject patients to higher radiation doses. Thus, patients cannot be subjected to
the frequency of exposure to such scans. To cater to these limitations encountered by CT
and CBCT, synthetic CT (sCT) generation methods are being used [3]. These methods take
advantage of CBCT and CT and transform CBCT to high-quality sCT images, which offer
details on par with CT images.
The sCT generation is traditionally carried out using deep learning methods. Two of
the most widely used models in this context include generative adversarial networks
(GANs) and variational autoencoders (VAEs) [4–6]. These methods have shown promis-
ing outcomes in the reduction of CBCT artifacts and improving the HU accuracy levels;
however, they face some challenges. Some of these challenges include mode collapse,
limited structural fidelity, and higher dependency on the paired datasets. Additionally,
the complexity inherently associated with medical images, especially that associated with
capturing the fine anatomical details and noise, remains a gap to be addressed to attain
high structural fidelity. Additionally, these challenges are required to be handled to provide
improved generalizability across a diverse range of datasets.
To overcome these limitations, diffusion models have emerged as alternative solutions
for the sCT generation [7]. These methods offer several advantages, such as handling the
noise, preserving the structural details, and offering improved quantitative accuracy. The
diffusion models are based on an iterative refinement strategy for the image denoising.
This is followed by a reverse recovery process where images sCT images are generated to
be closer to CT images.
This review focuses on the exploration of conditional diffusion models and their
applications in the sCT generation. The model evaluation of these methods in light of
performance and clinical applications has been carried out. This review focuses on the
exploration of conditional diffusion models and their applications in sCT generation. Rather
than seeking to establish definitive superiority over earlier approaches, the review aims to
synthesize the currently available evidence, describe the main methodological strategies
used, and examine the extent to which the reported findings support potential clinical
relevance. Given the novelty of the field, particular attention is paid to the limitations of
the current evidence base and to priorities for future validation.
From a medical physics perspective, diffusion models offer a probabilistic generative
framework that is naturally aligned with uncertainty-aware image reconstruction and
dose computation. Unlike deterministic deep learning models that produce a single point
estimate, conditional diffusion models learn a conditional distribution over synthetic CT
images given CBCT input, enabling voxel-wise variability and uncertainty estimation. This
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 3 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 3 of 24
probabilistic formulation is conceptually consistent with established uncertainty propaga-
tion principles in radiotherapy, where imaging uncertainties translate into dose calculation
uncertainties. As such, diffusion models should not be viewed merely as higher-capacity
deep networks but rather as stochastic physical inference models capable of representing
ambiguity arising from noise, scatter, and incomplete CBCT information.
2. Overview of Diffusion Model Families for CT Image Synthesis
Diffusion-based synthetic CT generation begins with learning a mapping from noisy
or artifact-prone CBCT images to clean, diagnostic-quality sCT representations. The target
is to recover a high-resolution, anatomically aligned CT image that retains structural
fidelity to the CBCT input. Although earlier methods explored GAN-based mappings, their
limitations in uncertainty modeling and structural stability have made diffusion-based
techniques more attractive.
Diffusion models for CBCT-to-sCT are typically formulated as conditional generative
models, where the CBCT serves as a conditioning input. This enables patient-specific image
generation with consistent anatomical correspondence. High spatial and contrast fidelity is
required to ensure accurate downstream use in the calculation of radiotherapy doses or
treatment planning. Thus, generative models must respect both global and local anatomical
contexts present in CBCT, although learning to correct for modality-specific limitations
such as noise and scatter.
CT Output Specificity in CBCT-Conditioned Models
The output specificity of sCT generation models is of paramount clinical importance.
For sCT to be usable in dose computation or image-guided radiotherapy, the generated
CT must not only appear realistic but also be anatomically accurate with respect to CBCT.
Diffusion models provide several advantages here:
• Structural Preservation: The denoising process is inherently robust to noise perturba-
tions, and when strongly conditioned on CBCT, the model tends to preserve macro
and micro anatomical features, including subtle tissue boundaries.
• Uncertainty Modeling: Unlike deterministic models, diffusion models model a pos-
terior distribution over CT outputs conditioned on CBCT. This allows clinicians to
assess confidence levels and potentially detect ambiguous or low-quality regions.
• Multi-modal Consistency: When paired with frequency domain or multi-scale condi-
tioning, such as FGDA, the model can enforce consistency between CT texture and
CBCT geometry, thus increasing diagnostic confidence.
Output specificity can be quantitatively assessed using metrics such as structural
similarity (SSIM), peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), and clinical dose deviation. However,
visual and expert-based evaluations remain crucial due to the clinical significance of subtle
anatomical discrepancies.
In summary, strong CBCT conditioning combined with diffusion-based generative
modelling yields high-specificity synthetic CT images suitable for integration into clini-
cal workflows.
3. Analysis of Diffusion Model Variants
In the following sections, we analyze four prominent diffusion model variants—
denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs), denoising diffusion implicit mod-
els (DDIMs), latent diffusion models (LDMs), and frequency-guided diffusion models
(FGDMs)—within the context of CBCT-conditioned synthetic CT generation. Our exposi-
tion emphasizes both the theoretical and clinical implications.
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 4 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 4 of 24
3.1. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs)
DDPMs constitute the foundational class of diffusion models. They simulate a forward
process in which Gaussian noise is gradually added to an image over multiple time steps
and a reverse process that learns to denoise this corrupted data iteratively, ultimately
recovering the clean image distribution from noise [8]. The DDPM approach is formally
grounded in variational inference and models the data likelihood through a series of
conditional Gaussians.
Let x0 ∈ RH×W denote the ground truth CT image and let y be the conditioning
CBCT input image. The goal is to learn a conditional distribution pθ(x0 | y) that generates
synthetic CT images x0 conditioned on y.
A DDPM defines a denoising process q that gradually adds Gaussian noise to the data
in T steps. The process is defined as
q(x1:T | x0) =
T
∏
t=1
q(xt | xt−1), (1)
q(xt | xt−1) := N (xt;
p
1 − βtxt−1, βtI)
where {βt}T
t=1 is a variance schedule, typically linear or cosine. The marginal distribution
of xt given x0 can be derived analytically
q(xt | x0) =N (xt; √¯αtx0, (1 − ¯αt)I), (2)
where αt := 1 − βt and ¯αt := ∏t
s=1 αs. This allows one to sample xt ∼ q(xt | x0) directly.
The reverse (generative) process is another Markov chain parameterized by a neu-
ral network
pθ(ˆx0:T | y) = p(xT)
T
∏
t=1
pθ(ˆxt−1 | ˆxt, y), (3)
pθ(ˆxt−1 | ˆxt, y) := N (ˆxt−1; µθ(ˆxt, t, y), Σθ(ˆxt, t, y))
In most implementations, the variance Σθ is either fixed or learned separately. A com-
mon simplification uses
µθ(ˆxt, t, y) = 1√αt

ˆxt − βt√1 − ¯αt
ϵθ(ˆxt, t, y)

, (4)
where ϵθ predicts the noise added at step t.
The training loss is based on the variational lower bound (VLB) on the conditional
negative log-likelihood which is
log pθ(x0 | y) ≥ Eq

log pθ(x0:T | y)
q(x1:T | x0)

=: −LVLB (5)
This decomposes into per timestep KL divergences
LVLB = Eq
"
T
∑
t=1
DKL(q(xt−1 | xt, x0) ∥ pθ(ˆxt−1 | ˆxt, y)) − log pθ(ˆx0 | ˆx1, y)
#
(6)
A practical surrogate loss simplifies the training objective to
Lsimple = Ex0,ϵ,t



ϵ − ϵθ(√¯αtx0 +
p
1 − ¯αtϵ, t, y)



2
(7)
where ϵ ∼ N(0, I). This is essentially denoising score matching.
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 5 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 5 of 24
This approach has been depicted in Figure 1 and allows them to reconstruct high-
quality sCT images with improved artefact reduction and HU accuracy.
Forward process
Reverse process (Denoising)
CT image
x1x0 x2
q(x2|x1) xT−1 xT
q(xT|xT−1)
 xT
ϵθ(ˆxT,y) xTϵθ(ˆxT−1,y) pθ(ˆxT−1|ˆxT)ϵθ(ˆx2,y)ϵθ(ˆx1,y) pθ(ˆx1|ˆx2)
sCT image
ˆx0
CBCT image (guidance)
y
Figure 1. Workflow of Conditional DDPM for CBCT to CT image synthesis.
At inference, to generate an sCT image it involves the reverse generative process as in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 DDPM algorithm
Require: Sample xT ∼ N(0, I).
1: for t = T, . . . , 1do
2: ˆxt−1 ∼ N(µθ(ˆxt, t, y), Σt)
Output: x 0
3: end for
This process is stochastic and allows for sampling multiple plausible sCTs per input y.
3.2. Conditioning Mechanisms in CBCT-to-sCT Diffusion Models
As mentioned above, conditioning the diffusion process on CBCT input is central to
the success of sCT generation. The goal is to guide the generative process so that the output
is not only plausible as a CT image but also accurately reflects the anatomical structure
present in the CBCT. Several strategies have been explored in the literature:
• Input Concatenation: The CBCT volume is concatenated with the noisy latent or image
sample at each denoising step. Often it is implemented using a conditional UNet
where ϵθ(ˆxt, t, y) takes y as input, typically via concatenation. This direct approach
has the benefit of simplicity and early integration of structural information.
• Feature Modulation (FiLM): The CBCT inputy is encoded via a convolutional network,
and its features are used to modulate the internal layers of the denoising network.
FiLM layers apply affine transformations conditioned on CBCT features, allowing
spatial and channel-specific influence. This effectively models pθ(x0 | y) without
needing explicit paired supervision.
• Cross-Attention: Particularly powerful in vision transformers and UNet-based diffu-
sion models, cross-attention enables the model to selectively integrate information
from CBCT across spatial scales. The attention maps provide interpretability and
allow flexible registration-free alignment.
• Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG): This strategy trains the diffusion model with and
without conditioning. During inference, guidance strength is controlled by interpo-
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 6 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 6 of 24
lating between the two outputs. This enhances fidelity by adjusting conditional vs.
unconditional noise estimates
ϵguided = (1 + w)ϵθ(ˆxt, t, y) − wϵθ(ˆxt, t), (8)
where w > 0 is a guidance scale.
This allows tuning the influence of CBCT during generation, which is especially useful
when dealing with varying levels of CBCT quality.
Each of these mechanisms seeks to achieve anatomical fidelity while allowing flexibility
in how much and where CBCT information is used. For sCT applications, high-resolution
alignment, especially in bone and soft tissue boundaries, is critical. Thus, architectural
choices that facilitate multiscale fusion of CBCT features are preferred.
The advantages of the DDPM are that it captures uncertainty since output diversity re-
flects aleatoric uncertainty in sCT generation, and it is a non-adversarial training approach,
which is more stable compared to GANs. However, the sampling might be slow since it
requires T ∼ 1000 and large compute resources for training and inference. Furthermore,
it is of utmost importance to align CT and CBCT conditioning features overall. Although
DDPMs yield high-fidelity outputs, they are computationally intensive due to the large
number of sequential denoising steps required.
3.3. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIMs)
DDIMs redefine the generative process as a non-Markovian, deterministic mapping
that preserves the same training objective as DDPM but modifies the sampling process,
allowing fewer sampling steps without significant loss in quality [ 9]. By leveraging a
reparameterized trajectory through the diffusion space, DDIMs enable faster inference.
Given a noisy sample xt, we deterministically obtain xt−1 via:
ˆxt−1 =
p
¯αt−1x0 +
s
1 − ¯αt−1 − η2 1 − ¯αt
1 − ¯αt−1
ϵθ(ˆxt, t, y) +ηϵ, (9)
where η ∈ [0, 1] controls the stochasticity (η = 0 yields a fully deterministic path). In the
most common setting:
ˆxt−1 =
p
¯αt−1
 ˆxt − √1 − ¯αtϵθ(ˆxt, t, y)√¯αt

+
p
1 − ¯αt−1ϵθ(ˆxt, t, y). (10)
This eliminates the need to sample Gaussian noise ϵ during generation, drastically
accelerating inference; for example, from 1000 to 50 steps, without retraining.
Although not always emphasized in medical imaging tasks, DDIMs provide a prac-
tical trade-off between speed and image quality, making them suitable for real-time or
interactive applications.
3.4. Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs)
Latent diffusion models address the computational burden of pixel space generation
by operating in a compressed latent space learned via autoencoders or variational encoders
(VAE) [10]. By learning the diffusion process in this low-dimensional domain, LDMs
dramatically lower the memory and runtime cost, enabling the use of higher-resolution
medical data. Once denoising is completed in the latent domain, a decoder reconstructs the
final image. These models are the class of generative models that can work and operate
on the low dimensional latent space instead of the direct image space. LDMs make use
of VAE-based encoder-decoder settings for learning the compressed latent representation
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 7 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 7 of 24
of the CT images. A CT image x0 is first encoded into a latent vector z0 using a VAE
encoder E (·):
z0 = E (x0) (11)
and the forward diffusion process operates in latent space, where the noise is progressively
added to the latent vector z0 to obtain a noisy latent vector zt at time step t:
zt = √¯αtz0 +
p
1 − ¯αtϵ, ϵ ∼ N(0, I) (12)
In the reverse process, the CT image generation is conditioned on the CBCT image y,
which is passed through a condition encoder to generate a context vector used to guide the
reverse diffusion
zy = Ey(y) (13)
This conditional embedding captures anatomical priors for guiding the reverse de-
noising process.
In the reverse process the noisy latent vector zt at timestep t, is used predicts the noise
component ϵt using the and the condition embedding zy:
ϵt = ϵθ(ˆzt, t, zy) (14)
The DDIM style update is then applied
ˆzt−1 =
p
¯αt−1
 ˆzt − √1 − ¯αtϵt
¯αt

+
p
1 − ¯αt−1ϵt (15)
After denoising the latent back to z0, the final sCT image is reconstructed using the
VAE decoder D(·):
ˆx0 = D(ˆz0) (16)
The diagram in Figure 2 shows the training workflow of the forward and reverse
diffusion processes in the latent domain with conditional CBCT guidance.
Forward process (Latent domain)
Reverse process (Denoising)
E
CT image
x0 z0Encoder zT−1 zT
zT
ϵθ(ˆzT,y) zTϵθ(ˆzT−1,y)ϵθ(ˆz1,y)D Decoder
sCT image
ˆx0
E
CBCT image (guidance)
zy
y
Figure 2. Workflow of LDM for CT image synthesis using CBCT guidance.
3.5. Frequency-Guided Diffusion Models (FGDMs)
FGDMs introduce frequency domain priors to diffusion-based generation, with the
aim of improving the recovery of high-frequency details often lost in noisy imaging modal-
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 8 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 8 of 24
ities [11]. These models typically embed frequency-aware losses or frequency-decomposed
guidance into the diffusion pipeline, enabling sharper reconstruction of anatomical bound-
aries and fine textures. For CBCT applications, FGDMs are particularly effective in restoring
bone edges and soft tissue transitions, which are otherwise blurred due to scatter and noise.
FGDA aids in improving the diffusion process through an incorporation of spatial
and frequency domain information. The idea is to denoise the network and frequency
domain features that are extracted from the CBCT images. This process leads to improved
anatomical details and fidelity in the sCT reconstruction. As in standard diffusion models,
the forward process perturbs a clean CT image x0 into a noisy version xT by sequentially
adding Gaussian noise:
xt = √¯αtx0 +
p
1 − ¯αtϵ, ϵ ∼ N(0, I), t = 1, . . . ,T (17)
To guide the reverse process, a frequency domain representation f of the image is
extracted by applying a frequency transform, DCT or FFTF, to the CBCT image Y to obtain
frequency coefficients. A frequency encoder E f (·) and condition encoder Ec(·) are used to
derive rich feature representations. To guide the reverse process, a combined conditioning
vector is obtained by concatenating spatial and frequency-based features:
zf = E f (F (y)) ⊕ Ec(y) (18)
where F (·) denotes the frequency transform and ⊕ indicated the vector concatenation.
The reverse process is carried out using a noise predictor ϵθ guided by both spatial
and frequency information:
ϵt = ϵθ(ˆxt, t, zf) (19)
This is used in the deterministic update rule (as in DDIM):
ˆxt−1 =
p
¯αt−1
 ˆxt − √1 − ¯αtϵt
¯αt

+
p
1 − ¯αt−1ϵt (20)
The diagram in Figure 3 shows the training workflow of the diffusion process with
conditional CBCT frequency guidance.
Forward process
Reverse process (Denoising)
CT image
x1x0 x2
q(x2|x1) xT−1 xT
q(xT|xT−1)
 xT
ϵθ(ˆxT,y) xTϵθ(ˆxT−1,y) pθ(ˆxT−1|ˆxT)ϵθ(ˆx2,y)ϵθ(ˆx1,y)
sCT image
ˆx0
Ef(F(y))⊕ Ec(y)
CBCT image (guidance)
y
Figure 3. Workflow of the Frequency Guided Diffusion model for CT image Synthesis.
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 9 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 9 of 24
3.6. Comparison with Prior Reviews
Several reviews and surveys have previously examined sCT generation for radio-
therapy; however, their scopes and emphases differ considerably from the present work.
Ref. [12] provided a broad overview of deep-learning-based sCT generation across multiple
modalities (MRI, PET, and CBCT), focusing on convolutional and adversarial networks, but
without dedicated attention to diffusion-based methods. Ref. [13] presented a systematic
review that included MRI → CT, CBCT → CT, and PET attenuation correction tasks; while
CBCT-based synthesis was included, it formed only one component of a wider multi-modal
evaluation, and diffusion approaches were not yet a main focus. Our earlier article [ 14]
conducted a PRISMA-guided review dedicated to synthetic CT generation from CBCT,
summarizing CNN-based, GAN-based, and early transformer approaches. At that time,
conditional diffusion models were either absent from the literature or mentioned only
briefly as an emerging direction. In contrast, the present manuscript focuses exclusively
on conditional diffusion models for CBCT-to-CT synthesis. This narrower scope enables a
more detailed examination of conditioning strategies, architectural design choices, training
paradigms, and specific radiotherapy applications that cannot be addressed in a compre-
hensive review. As diffusion models have become the most rapidly advancing class of
generative techniques in medical imaging, this targeted systematic review addresses a
distinct and timely research question that was not covered in our earlier publication. Addi-
tionally, theSynthRAD2023 Challenge Report [15] benchmarked MRI → CT and CBCT → CT
models across institutions, highlighting the weak correlation between image-based similar-
ity metrics and dosimetric accuracy, an observation that further motivates the inclusion of
dose-relevant outcomes in the present review. The summary of the works mentioned is
listed in Table 1.
Table 1. Comparison of existing reviews and the present work.
Reference Scope
Modalities
Architectures
Covered
CBCT → CT
Focus
Diffusion
Models
Discussed
Evaluation
Emphasis
Key Limitation
vs. Present
Work
[12]
MRI → CT, PET
→ CT, CBCT →
CT (general)
CNN, GAN Minor Not covered Image quality
metrics
Broad
multimodality
scope; no
diffusion or
conditional
methods.
[13]
MRI → CT,
CBCT → CT,
PET AC
CNN, GAN,
hybrid Partial Brief mention Image + dose
metrics (varied)
Multi-modality
scope; diffusion
not
emphasized.
[14]
CBCT → CT
(systematic
review)
CNN, GAN,
transformer Primary Early emerging Image + dose
metrics
Did not isolate
conditional
diffusion
models.
(SynthRAD
2023,
Report) [15]
MRI → CT,
CBCT → CT
(benchmark)
Multiple DL
architectures
Benchmark
subset Evaluation only Image–dose
correlation
Benchmark
paper, not a
review;
provides
performance
context.
Compared with these works, the novelty of the current review lies in its exclusive
focus on conditional diffusion models for CBCT → CT synthesis, offering: (i) a dedicated
taxonomy of conditional diffusion architectures (noise conditioning, guidance strategies,
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 10 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 10 of 24
latent vs pixel space design); (ii) a structured synthesis of quantitative performance relative
to CNN/GAN baselines; (iii) a cross-study analysis that integrates image similarity and
dose-based accuracy, bridging algorithmic and clinical relevance. This work therefore
complements broader sCT reviews by narrowing the lens to diffusion-based CBCT → CT
translation and providing both methodological clarity and clinical context to this rapidly
evolving domain.
4. Aim of the Study
The primary aim of this systematic review is to critically evaluate the application of
conditional diffusion models for generating sCT images from CBCT data. Specifically, this
study seeks to address the limitations of CBCT, such as image noise, scatter, and artifacts,
by exploring how diffusion models can improve the quality and clinical utility of sCT. The
review aims to systematically identify the methodologies employed in conditional diffusion
approaches, compare their performance with traditional deep learning techniques in terms
of accuracy and robustness, and examine their clinical relevance. Because this is a rapidly
developing field with emerging literature, the systematic review contains a limited number
of published studies. Ultimately, the study aims to provide insights into the potential of
conditional diffusion models to enhance dosimetric precision and anatomical fidelity in
radiotherapy, although highlighting gaps and directions for future research.
Research Questions
1. Which conditional diffusion strategies have been used for sCT generation from CBCT?
2. What quantitative and clinically relevant outcomes have been reported for these
models, and how do they compare descriptively with comparator approaches
across studies?
3. What methodological and translational limitations currently constrain the clinical
applicability of conditional diffusion models for sCT generation?
5. Methodology
This section begins by outlining the search strategy employed to identify relevant
studies for the review. Following this, a comprehensive description of the systematic and
methodical steps undertaken to conduct the review is provided, ensuring transparency and
replicability of the research process.
5.1. Search Strategy
This systematic review followed the PRISMA 2020 statement [16] and used the PICO
framework in Table 2 to guide search development. The literature search was conducted
across PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, IEEE Xplore, and Google Scholar for studies
published between 2013 and 2024. Search terms combined controlled vocabulary, where
supported, with free text keywords related to diffusion-based generative modeling and
CBCT-to-CT synthesis. Core concepts included "diffusion model", "conditional diffusion",
"denoising diffusion", "score-based generative model", "cone-beam computed tomogra-
phy", "CBCT", "synthetic CT", and radiotherapy-related terms. Database-specific Boolean
search strings and search limits are provided in Supplementary Table S1 to ensure repro-
ducibility. Searches were limited to English-language publications. Because this is a rapidly
developing field, screening also considered emerging literature indexed in the searched
databases. The handling of conference proceedings and preprints is stated explicitly in the
eligibility criteria below.
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 11 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 11 of 24
Table 2. The PICO framework for systematic reviews.
Population All patients underwent definitive oncology planning.
Intervention Diffusion Model OR Conditional Diffusion OR Denoising Diffusion
OR Score-Based Generative Model, CBCT OR Cone Beam Computed
Tomography OR Cone-Beam CT, Imaging Reconstruction OR IR,
Unsupervised Deep Learning OR UDL, Dose Estimations OR DE,
Medical Imaging OR MI, Artifact Reduction OR AR, Radiotherapy.
Comparison CT OR Computed Tomography.
Outcome Sensitivity, Specificity, Accuracy.
5.2. Inclusion Criteria
1. Articles explicitly addressing diffusion models for synthetic CT generation.
2. Research employing conditional approaches in diffusion models, such as guidance by
specific features or anatomical priors.
3. Peer-reviewed journal articles, conference proceedings, and directly relevant preprints
were eligible if they reported sufficient methodological detail and unique information
relevant to the review question; non-peer-reviewed records were explicitly flagged in
the synthesis and interpreted with additional caution.
4. Publications from the last 11 years (2013–2024).
5. Articles published in English.
5.3. Exclusion Criteria
1. Studies do not involve diffusion models as a primary method for synthetic CT generation.
2. Papers on CBCT enhancement, noise reduction, or artifact correction unrelated to
synthetic CT generation.
3. Non-peer-reviewed blogs, editorials, or opinion pieces.
4. Duplicates across databases.
5. Articles lacking sufficient methodological details or evaluation metrics.
6. Articles published in non-English languages or without reliable translations.
7. Publications before 2013 unless they are foundational studies in diffusion models.
5.4. Study Selection
Following the systematic search, articles are screened based on their titles and abstracts
to identify potentially relevant studies. After undergoing an initial screening process,
articles proceed to a full-text review, where their suitability for inclusion in the systematic
review is thoroughly assessed. The inclusion/exclusion criteria were applied strictly
during the screening process, with reasons for exclusion documented for transparency
and reproducibility·
5.5. Data Extraction
Following the retrieval of results from the database search, the identified records
were imported into a reference management tool, EndNote, to organize and consolidate
the search outcomes. During this process, duplicate entries were systematically identi-
fied and removed. The subsequent screening of studies was conducted independently
by two reviewers, Alzahra Altalib (AA) and Alessandro Perelli (AP), who applied the
predefined eligibility criteria to determine the suitability of studies for inclusion in the
systematic review. Any disagreements between the reviewers were resolved through dis-
cussion to achieve consensus. Data extraction was performed from the final set of selected
articles using a standardized approach. Key details were collected, including publication
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 12 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 12 of 24
information (e.g., year, authors, and country of origin) and specific parameters related to
diffusion models, such as noise injection methods, dataset types, and model architectures,
etc. The extracted study-level dataset used for this review is provided in Supplementary
Table S2 to improve transparency and reproducibility.
5.6. Quality Assessment
To assess the methodological quality of the included studies, two researchers, AA
and AP , employed the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2 (QUADAS-2)
tool, as outlined by [ 17]. This tool was specifically used to evaluate the risk of bias and
ensure methodological rigor. By providing a structured framework, QUADAS-2 facilitated
a systematic assessment of potential biases, the overall quality, and the robustness of each
study included in the systematic review.
5.7. Data Synthesis
The syntheses were examined and are presented to identify general patterns, advan-
tages, limitations, and deficiencies in the research pertaining to the use of diffusion models
for sCT generation. The information extraction was based on pre-defined criteria that
have been presented later in Table 3. Because the included studies differed substantially in
anatomical region, dataset composition, paired versus unpaired supervision, dimensional-
ity, comparator models, and reported outcome measures, formal quantitative cross-study
comparison was not considered methodologically appropriate. We therefore performed a
structured descriptive synthesis. Studies were compared at the study level according to
conditioning strategy, anatomy, dimensionality, supervision paradigm, and reported quanti-
tative or clinically proximal outcomes. Heterogeneity was treated as a central consideration
in interpretation rather than being reduced to a pooled comparative estimate.
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 13 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 13 of 24
Table 3. Synthesis of the included articles on sct generation using diffusion models.
Author/Year Study Type Population Pre-Processing
Conditional
Loss Function
(Reverse
Process)
Type of Neural
Network
(Reverse
Process)
Training
Strategies Data Type
Outcomes
(MAE, PSNR,
etc.)
Noise Injection
(Type and
Levels)
Limitation Findings
[18]
Frequency-
Guided
Diffusion Model
(FGDM)
CBCT-CT
datasets across
institutions
(various
samples)
Frequency
domain filtering
(high-pass and
low-pass)
Frequency-
guided
regularization
Freq.-guided
diffusion model
Zero-shot
domain
adaptation
Paired and
unpaired
CBCT-C T data
FID improved,
PSNR: 30+ dB
Controlled
Gaussian noise
Limited
robustness to
freq. domain
changes
Preserves
structure in
translation
[19] Patient-specific
model
Lung cancer
(33 pts)
Normalization,
fine-tuning
Fine-tuned with
patient data
General lung
diffusion model
Paired
patient-specific
training
Paired 2D slices MAE: 15.96 HU,
PSNR: 33.57 dB
Gaussian noise
augmentation
Time-intensive
tuning
Improved sCT
quality, artifact
correction
[20] Patient-Specific
Diffusion Model
Lung Cancer
Patients
(33 patients)
Anatomical
fine-tuning
Custom
fine-tuning loss
Patient-Specific
DDPM
Paired
fine-tuning per
patient
Paired 2D slices MAE: 15 HU,
PSNR: 33 dB Gaussian noise
High
computation per
patient
Effective sCT
improvement
[21] Diffusion model
study
Chest Tumor
Dataset
(100+ samples)
Normalization Energy-guided
loss UNet Markov Chain
Sampling
Unpaired 3D
slices
MAE: 26.87 HU,
PSNR: 19.83 dB Gaussian noise
Mode collapse in
GAN
comparison
Superior to
GAN-based
methods
[11] FGDM
CBCT-CT
datasets across
institutions
(various)
Frequency
domain analysis
Frequency-
guided
regularization
Frequency-
guided diffusion
mode
Zero-shot
domain
adaptation
Paired and
unpaired
CBCT-CT data
FID improved,
PSNR: 30+ dB
Frequency-
guided noise
handling
Limited
robustness to
frequency
domain changes
Preserves
structural details
during domain
translation
[22]
Unsupervised
Bayesian
Framework
H&N, Lung,
Pancreas (75 pts)
Score-based
patient-specific
priors
Total variation
regularization
Patient-specific
diffusion model
Unsupervised
patient-specific
training
Unpaired 3D
slices
MAE: 50 HU,
PSNR: 31 dB
Score-based
noise scheduling
Slice alignment
sensitivity
Effective artifact
reduction
[7] Conditional
model
Brain, H&N
(50 pts)
Cropping,
normalization L2 loss Time-embedded
UNet
Paired image
data Paired 2D slices MAE: 25.99 HU,
PSNR: 30.49 dB
Gaussian noise
(time steps)
Requires large
paired data
Improved CBCT
quality for ART
[23] Stacked
coarse-to-fine
Pelvic cancer
(250 pts)
Multi-stage
denoising
Edge-preserving
loss
DDPM with
U-ConvNeXt Hierarch training Paired CBCT-CT
slices
PSNR: 34.02 dB,
SSIM: 87.14%
Hierarchical
denoising
Paired data
dependency
Enhanced ART
dosimetric
accuracy
[24] Dual Energy
Synthesis H&N (54 pts) CBCT-DECT
normalization
Gradient
matching loss
Multi-decoder
Swin-UNET
Multi-decoder
learning
Paired
CBCT-DECT
slices
MAE: 39.58 HU,
PSNR improved
Controlled
Gaussian noise
Dual-energy
data complexity
Improved tissue
characterization
[25] Latent diffusion
model
Prostate cancer
(30 pts)
FFT-based
high-freq
extraction
Hybrid
condition loss
Unified feature
encoder
Hybrid high-freq
embedding Paired 3D slices Gamma Passing
Rate: 93.8%
Gaussian noise
with FFT
Computation
inefficiency
Enhanced
anatomical
preservation
[26]
Texture-
preserving
model
Multicenter
CBCT-CT
(100+ pts)
FFT, wavelet
transforms
Boundary-aware
loss
Dual-branch
attention model
High-freq
optimization
Unpaired 3D
volumes
MAE: 18.48 HU,
PSNR: 33.07 dB
Adaptive
high-freq noise
handling
High compute
demand
Superior texture
preservation
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 14 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 14 of 24
6. Results
The database search yielded a total of 33 records, distributed as follows: 6 from Web
of Science (WoS), 8 from PubMed, 6 from Scopus, 7 from IEEE Xplore, and 6 from Google
Scholar. After the removal of duplicate entries, 17 unique records remained. Then these
records were assessed according to predetermined inclusion and exclusion criteria. As a
result, 6 records were excluded because they did not meet the study's inclusion criteria,
specifically because they were not applicable to image synthesis. Consequently, 11 records
were included in this systematic review. The screening process is fully described in PRISMA
Figure 4.
Figure 4. PRISMA flow diagram of conditional diffusion models for CBCT to CT image synthesis,
summarizing identification, screening, exclusion, and inclusion of studies. * Records identified from
each database before duplicate removal. ** Title and abstract screening was performed manually
without automation tools; no records were excluded at this stage.
The articles included and reviewed as part of this study collectively explored advanced
methods for sCT generation using CBCT and CT images. In all of these reviewed studies,
emphasis has been kept on the use of the diffusion model to achieve images with improved
quality, and artifact reduction and to be suitable for clinical settings. Numerous approaches
have been presented, including frequency-guided diffusion models (FGDM) [18], stacked
coarse-to-fine architectures [23], and patient-specific fine-tuning [7,19]. These works pro-
pose to address the inherent limitations associated with CBCT images, such as noise,
artifacts, and inaccuracies associated with Hounsfield Unit (HU) values. The studies in-
corporated a diverse range of datasets that included paired and unpaired CBCT-CT image
slices, dual-energy CT (DECT) scans, etc. These scans have been developed for the context
of radiation therapy and proton therapy [24]. The study further incorporated numerous
loss functions, including frequency domain regularization [18], edge-aware constraints [26],
and hybrid condition losses [7,23]. These loss functions help preserve anatomical details
while achieving structural and dosimetric accuracy.
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 15 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 15 of 24
The proposed neural network architectures, including Swin-UNETs [24], dual-branch
attention modules [26], and texture-preserving frameworks [26], were reported to achieve
promising performance in terms of PSNR, MAE, and SSIM within their respective study
settings. However, direct comparison across studies remains limited by substantial hetero-
geneity in anatomy, supervision strategy, dimensionality, dataset composition, and reported
endpoints. The current literature, therefore, supports the view that diffusion-based models
are promising but does not yet justify strong cross-study claims of consistent superiority
over earlier GAN- or VAE-based approaches. Despite these advancements, challenges such
as computational inefficiency, dependency on paired datasets, and limited robustness to
frequency variations persist [18,23,26]. Overall, the findings highlight the transformative
potential of diffusion-based models for improving CBCT-to-CT synthesis. The studies have
found improvements in adaptive radiotherapy, proton therapy planning, and broader clini-
cal applications [18,19,24]. A detailed synthesis of the included articles has been presented
in Table 3.
Study Characteristics and Outcome Reporting
The 11 included studies were heterogeneous across several key dimensions. Anatom-
ical targets included lung, head and neck, brain, pelvis, pancreas, prostate, chest tumor,
and multicenter mixed CBCT-CT cohorts. Both paired and unpaired supervision strategies
were represented, and models were implemented in 2D, 3D, and latent-space formulations.
Outcome reporting also varied considerably: some studies emphasized MAE and PSNR,
others reported SSIM, gamma passing rate, or dose-related findings, and some studies
presented partial or architecture specific outcomes only.
This heterogeneity has two implications. First, the field cannot currently be summa-
rized reliably using a single pooled quantitative estimate. Second, interpretation should
distinguish methodological promise from generalizable evidence. Accordingly, the remain-
der of the Results section is organized as a descriptive synthesis of reported outcomes and
heterogeneity patterns rather than a ranked quantitative comparison across studies.
7. Quantitative Analysis
The quantitative outcomes reported in the included studies are summarized descrip-
tively in this section. Because the studies differed substantially in anatomy, supervision
strategy, dimensionality, dataset composition, and reported endpoints, these results are
presented as study-level observations rather than as a formal pooled comparison. The most
commonly reported image quality metrics were MAE and PSNR, with a smaller number
of studies additionally reporting SSIM, gamma passing rate, or dose-related findings. As
shown in Figure 5, several included studies reported favorable MAE and PSNR values
within their respective experimental settings. For example, the texture-preserving diffusion
model reported an MAE of 18.48 HU and a PSNR of 33.07 dB, while the conditional diffu-
sion model reported an MAE of 25.99 HU and a PSNR of 30.49 dB. These findings suggest
promising image quality performance, although direct cross-study comparison remains
limited by heterogeneity.
The included studies also varied substantially in dataset size and structure, as illus-
trated in Figure 6. This variation reflects the diversity of current experimental settings
rather than a directly comparable benchmark. For example, the stacked coarse-to-fine
model was evaluated on a paired CBCT-CT pelvic dataset of 250 patients, whereas the
conditional diffusion model was evaluated on a smaller 50-patient brain and head-and-neck
cohort. Frequency-guided diffusion models were reported in both paired and unpaired
settings, illustrating the diversity of current experimental designs. However, the presence
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 16 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 16 of 24
of different supervision regimes further limits direct comparison of reported performance
across studies.
Figure 5. MAE and PSNR achievement for the reviewed models.
Figure 6. Data sampling and distribution across models.
Where individual studies explicitly reported percentage improvements relative to their
own comparator models, these results are summarized in Figure 7 for descriptive context
only. However, these comparisons are study-specific and should not be interpreted as
evidence of uniform superiority across the field, because the included studies used different
anatomies, datasets, supervision paradigms, and baseline methods. However, based on the
available studies, we can report that diffusion models have been found to improve the MAE
and PSNR performance compared to GANs and VAEs. The texture-preserving diffusion
model has been found to achieve an improvement of 35% in MAE and a 30% gain in PSNR.
Similarly, Frequency-Guided Diffusion has achieved a 25% improvement in MAE and a
20% gain in PSNR. Only a minority of the included studies reported clinically proximal
endpoints beyond image-similarity metrics. Most studies primarily emphasized MAE
and PSNR, whereas fewer reported SSIM, gamma passing rate, or dose-related relevance.
For example, one latent diffusion study reported a gamma passing rate of 93.8%, while
other studies discussed dosimetric accuracy or treatment planning relevance in adaptive
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 17 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 17 of 24
radiotherapy settings. However, these clinically meaningful endpoints were reported
inconsistently and with different evaluation frameworks, which limits direct synthesis of
translational benefit. Overall, the current evidence suggests potential clinical value, but
systematic dose-aware validation remains limited.
Figure 7. Reported study-specific percentage improvements relative to comparator models, where
such comparisons were explicitly provided in the original articles. These comparisons are descriptive
due to heterogeneity in anatomy, datasets, supervision strategies, and baseline models.
8. Discussion
The review highlights the potential of conditional diffusion models in sCT generation.
A central finding of this review is that heterogeneity, rather than simple average perfor-
mance, currently defines the evidence base. For this reason, the present synthesis should be
interpreted as a structured qualitative/descriptive review of an emerging literature rather
than as a basis for formal quantitative cross-study ranking. The diffusion models have
been found to address the challenges associated with low-quality CBCT images in the form
of artifacts, noise, and structural inaccuracies. The use of diffusion models is relatively
unexplored; however, the reviewed models include FGDM, Texture-Preserving Diffusion
Models, and Stacked Coarse-to-Fine Models as being the most dominant and promising
methods. These methods rely on the use of advanced loss functions such as frequency
domain regularization and edge-aware constraints. This helps them to retain the fine
anatomical details and to improve the dosimetric accuracy. The use of datasets across the
studies further highlights the adaptability of the models across several clinical settings. The
dataset approach ranges from single-institution paired datasets and multicenter unpaired
datasets. The FGDM and Texture-Preserving Diffusion have further illustrated the MAE
and PSNR performance and were found to improve sCT image quality by reducing the
artifacts. Compared to the traditional deep learning models, including GANs and VAEs,
the diffusion models are outperforming. This is valid in terms of structural fidelity and
quantitative metrics. For example, the Texture-Preserving Diffusion model has shown an
MAE improvement of 35% and a PSNR improvement of 30%. This is potentially due to the
iterative refinement approach adopted by the models that render high-quality images by
integrating domain-specific priors and noise reduction. However, some of the challenges
remain to be addressed, including the computational requirement and high reliance on
the paired datasets. This may somehow limit them from becoming ubiquitous in clinical
settings. In clinical settings, the use of diffusion models for sCT generation can have
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 18 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 18 of 24
significant implications in terms of adaptive radiotherapy and proton therapy planning.
The models work by reducing the artifacts and improving HU accuracy, thereby leading
to improved dose computations and precise treatment planning. This is especially true
for anatomically challenging regions. Models like FGDM can also work with unpaired
datasets to facilitate scalability.
8.1. Clinical Relevance and Practical Considerations
Recent approaches based on diffusion models have shown improvement in the quali-
tative accuracy of synthetic CT images. However, their clinical relevance depends on their
quantifiable impacts on radiotherapy workflows. The next step in the clinical approach is to
make a direct correlation between the enhanced image quality and treatment accuracy in the
dose calculation. Thus, integration of conditional diffusion models into clinical pipelines
can reduce uncertainty in CBCT-based dose computation. This can enable more precise
dose delivery and adaptive re-planning. In addition, future research shall emphasize the
scalability and inference efficiency to ensure real-time applicability in online adaptive
radiotherapy. Domain adaptation strategies include fine-tuning across different scanners,
protocols, and anatomical sites. These will be essential to maintain consistent performance
in heterogeneous clinical environments. Such considerations highlight the importance of
bridging technical advancement and having measurable radiotherapy outcomes to fully
realize the translational potential of diffusion-based CBCT to CT synthesis.
In particular, future studies should directly evaluate whether improvements in sCT
image quality translate into more accurate dose calculation, more reliable treatment plan-
ning, and measurable clinical benefit in adaptive radiotherapy workflows. At present, this
remains a key limitation of the literature, because clinically meaningful endpoints were
reported in only a subset of the included studies and were not evaluated using standardized
criteria across the field.
In addition to image quality and artifact suppression, studies have reported promising
clinical implications of sCT synthesis for radiotherapy applications. For instance, diffusion-
based sCT generation has been evaluated for its impact on dose reconstruction accuracy.
This shows a mean dose difference below 2% compared to planning sCT in head-and-neck
and pelvic cases. Such improvements translate into more reliable adaptive re-planning
and target coverage assessment. In addition, the high-fidelity sCT outputs can facilitate
accurate auto contouring of organs at risk. These can reduce manual workload and vari-
ability. Preliminary investigations into workflow integration have shown the feasibility of
incorporating trained diffusion models into online adaptive pipelines. These can have an
inference time of less than 5 to 10 s per volume on modern GPUs.
8.2. Answer to Research Questions
The three research questions identified as part of this work in the introduction have
been answered as follows:
1. The conditional diffusion models for sCT generation are limited yet have adopted
several approaches. These include Frequency-Guided Diffusion Models, Texture-
Preserving Diffusion Models, and Stacked Coarse-to-Fine Models. The models are
based on advanced loss functions, including frequency domain regularization, edge-
aware constrained losses and hybrid conditional losses. This helps with ensuring that
high anatomical accuracy is achieved and artifacts are reduced. In addition, some
adoptive techniques, such as dual-mode feature fusion and hierarchical learning, are
also found in the articles reviewed.
2. Diffusion models have typically been found to outperform traditional deep learning
models. These specifically include GANs and VAEs in terms of accuracy. Quantitative
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 19 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 19 of 24
assessment has shown that models consistently achieve low MAE and high PSNR. The
best-performing model, Texture-Preserving Diffusion, has shown a 35% improvement
in MAE and a 30% improvement in PSNR performance compared to GANs. Such
improvements are due to the adoption of an iterative approach using domain-specific
priors. This allows diffusion models to handle the noise and artifacts effectively.
3. The clinical implications of diffusion models for sCT generation are expected to be
numerous. By enabling a reduction of artifacts and showing a tendency to increase
HU accuracy, diffusion models can allow precise dose calculations. This may lead
to improved treatment planning in adaptive radiotherapy and proton therapy. The
ability of the models to work with unpaired datasets (FGDM, for instance) helps
with improved scalability and thus applicability in many clinical settings. Overall,
diffusion models have shown the potential to improve patient outcomes through
safe and effective radiation treatments. However, further validations are needed to
analyze the computational inefficiencies associated with these models.
8.3. Risk of Bias Assessment
The QUADAS-2 assessment showed some variability in methodological quality across
the included studies. All studies were rated as low concern in patient selection, indicating
generally acceptable dataset selection procedures. lower overall concern was observed
in [11,18,23,25,26], which were rated Low across all four domains and therefore had Low
overall concern. In contrast, refs. [ 7,19–22,24] showed high overall concern, mainly due
to limitations in index tests and reference methods, and in some studies also flow and
timing. These findings indicate that, although quantitative results were often favorable,
the strength of evidence was not uniform across studies. Greater confidence may therefore
be placed in studies with low overall concern, whereas results from studies with high
overall concern should be interpreted more cautiously. Because the included evidence
showed mixed methodological quality, the findings were synthesized qualitatively rather
than through formal meta-analysis. These results are summarized in Figure 8.
Figure 8. The risk of bias assessment results for all the included studies was conducted using
QUADAS 2.
8.4. Registration and Reporting
The findings of this systematic review were reported in adherence to the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews (PRISMA) guidelines. The review was con-
ducted in accordance with a pre-established protocol registered with the International
Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO), bearing the registration num-
ber CRD42024619240. To improve transparency and reproducibility, the Supplementary
Materials, Table S1, provide the database-specific search strategies; Table S2 provides the
extracted study-level dataset used in the descriptive synthesis; and Figure S1 provides the
QUADAS-2 risk of bias (traffic lights).
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 20 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 20 of 24
8.5. Hounsfield Unit Accuracy and Dose Calculation Sensitivity
In radiotherapy treatment planning, errors in synthetic CT Hounsfield Unit (HU)
values propagate nonlinearly into electron density and stopping power estimation, directly
affecting dose calculation accuracy. Prior physics studies have demonstrated that systematic
HU deviations of approximately 30–50 HU in soft tissue can result in dose calculation errors
on the order of 1–3%, depending on beam energy, tissue composition, and anatomical
location. In high-gradient regions or heterogeneous anatomies such as the lung or head and
neck, spatially structured HU errors extending over several centimeters may lead to even
larger localized dose deviations than uncorrelated voxel-wise noise of similar magnitude.
Although most diffusion-based sCT studies primarily report image similarity metrics
such as MAE or PSNR, the reported MAE values in the range of 15–30 HU fall within
a regime generally considered acceptable for photon radiotherapy planning. However,
the clinical relevance of these metrics ultimately depends on the spatial distribution of
residual HU errors rather than their global average, underscoring the need for dose-aware
evaluation strategies.
In the context of this review, this is particularly relevant because most included studies
reported global image similarity metrics, whereas only a smaller subset evaluated clinically
proximal outcomes that more directly reflect treatment planning impact.
8.6. Uncertainty Quantification in Diffusion-Based sCT
A defining advantage of diffusion models over conventional deterministic networks is
their ability to generate multiple plausible realizations of synthetic CT for a single CBCT
input. From a medical physics standpoint, this enables explicit estimation of aleatoric un-
certainty arising from imaging noise and scatter. Voxel-wise uncertainty can be quantified
using the variance or credible intervals computed across multiple diffusion samples, pro-
viding spatial maps of prediction confidence. Such uncertainty estimates are particularly
relevant in radiotherapy, where regions of elevated HU uncertainty may correspond to
increased dose calculation sensitivity. For example, uncertainty envelopes on stopping
power ratios could be propagated through dose engines to estimate dose volume histogram
(DVH) variability. Despite this potential, none of the reviewed studies performed formal
uncertainty propagation into dose metrics, highlighting a critical gap between probabilistic
image synthesis and physics-based treatment planning.
8.7. Scanner and Protocol Variability
CBCT acquisition parameters vary substantially across institutions and vendors, in-
cluding tube voltage (typically 80–140 kVp), bowtie filtration, detector geometry, and
scatter correction algorithms. These factors can introduce systematic HU shifts exceeding
100 HU in CBCT images, particularly in low density or high scatter regions, while dif-
fusion models demonstrate robustness to random noise, their ability to correct protocol
dependent bias remains insufficiently characterized. Several reviewed studies employed
single institution datasets or fixed acquisition settings, limiting conclusions regarding cross
scanner generalizability. Without explicit modeling of scanner variability, diffusion-based
sCT models may inadvertently learn site specific correction patterns that fail to generalize,
which is of particular concern for multi center adaptive radiotherapy workflows.
9. Future Directions: Physics-Informed and Dose Aware
Diffusion Modeling
Future diffusion-based sCT frameworks could benefit from tighter integration with
physical constraints relevant to radiotherapy. Physics-informed diffusion models may
incorporate explicit priors on electron density continuity, mass density conservation, or
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 21 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 21 of 24
material segmentation consistency. Additionally, dose-aware training strategies could be
explored, where loss functions penalize HU errors weighted by local dose sensitivity rather
than uniform voxel-wise differences. For example, HU deviations in regions contributing
minimally to dose deposition may be clinically less relevant than small errors near target
volumes or organs at risk. Incorporating differentiable dose engines or surrogate dose mod-
els into the diffusion training loop could align image synthesis objectives with downstream
clinical impact, bridging the gap between image realism and treatment accuracy.
10. Conclusions
In conclusion, the advancement in the diffusion models, including conditional and
denoising diffusion approaches, has been found to exhibit high performance for sCT gen-
eration from CBCT images. The model helps bridge the gaps with the traditional models
in terms of noise handling and achieving high structural fidelity. The diffusion models
have been found to outperform traditional models, including GANs and VAEs, exhibiting
higher MAE, PSNR, and SSIM performance. These models rely on an iterative refinement
approach with domain-specific priors. This enables them to extract accurate image synthe-
sis, as well as dose calculations and treatment planning. This is especially true in adaptive
radiotherapy and proton therapy. Despite these benefits, some of the validations need to be
performed, including the analysis of computational inefficiencies and the experimentation
of real-world clinical data (especially unpaired). Future research shall focus on the opti-
mization of these models for their clinical scalability and to ensure their robust performance
in the intersubject domain. In summary, diffusion models are found to have promising
outcomes in radiotherapy outcomes and have the potential to improve patient care through
precise and reliable imaging. Overall, this review provides the first comprehensive syn-
thesis focused solely on conditional diffusion models for CBCT → CT synthesis. Through
a structured taxonomy and quantitative comparison with conventional CNN and GAN
approaches, it clarifies the present capabilities and limitations of diffusion-based image
translation. The findings highlight the potential of these models to enhance anatomical
fidelity and dose consistency while underscoring the need for standardized evaluation
protocols and larger, multi-institutional validation to enable clinical deployment. Future
validation should therefore focus on establishing direct links between image quality im-
provements and downstream radiotherapy endpoints, including dose calculation accuracy,
treatment planning robustness, and broader clinical utility.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/tomography12050064/s1, Table S1. Full database-specific search
strings; Table S2: Full extracted dataset of included studies; Figure S1: QUADAS-2 domain-level
risk-of-bias assessment for the included studies. Green symbols indicate low concern and red symbols
indicate high concern across the four QUADAS-2 domains: patient selection (D1), index test (D2),
reference standard (D3), and flow and timing (D4), together with the overall judgment for each study.
Author Contributions: A.A. performed the conceptualization, methodology, data curation, formal
analysis, investigation, and writing—original draft and review. C.L. contributed to the supervision
and writing—review and editing. A.P . contributed to the conceptualization, methodology, visual-
ization, supervision, and writing—review and editing. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: A. Altalib is supported by the Jordan University of Science and Technology PhD scholarship.
A. Perelli is supported by the Royal Academy of Engineering/Leverhulme Trust Research Fellowship
LTRF-2324-20-160.
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 22 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 22 of 24
Institutional Review Board Statement: This study did not involve the use of human subjects or
animals in its research. The authors declare no conflicts of interest, whether financial or personal, that
could influence or be relevant to the work presented in this paper.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable since the study does not involve humans.
Data Availability Statement: The data supporting this systematic review are available within
the article and its Supplementary Materials. These materials include the database-specific search
strategies, the extracted study-level dataset used for the descriptive synthesis and QUADAS-2 risk of
bias (traffic lights). No formal meta-analytic code is provided because the revised manuscript does
not include pooled quantitative analysis.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
CBCT Cone Beam Computed Tomography
CBCT-to-CT Cone Beam Computed Tomography to Computed Tomography
CDM Conditional diffusion model
CFG Classifier-free guidance
CNN Convolutional neural network
CT Computed tomography
DCT Discrete cosine transform
DDIM Denoising diffusion implicit model
DDPM Denoising diffusion probabilistic model
DECT Dual-energy computed tomography
DVH Dose-volume histogram
FFT Fast Fourier transform
FGDA Frequency-guided diffusion approach
FGDM Frequency-guided diffusion model
FiLM Feature-wise linear modulation
GAN Generative adversarial network
H&N Head and neck
HU Hounsfield unit
LDM Latent diffusion model
MAE Mean absolute error
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging
PICO Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome
PET Positron emission tomography
PRISMA Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
PROSPERO International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews
PSNR Peak signal-to-noise ratio
QUADAS-2 Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2
sCT Synthetic computed tomography
SSIM Structural similarity index measure
VAE Variational autoencoder
WoS Web of Science
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 23 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 23 of 24
References
1. Hatcher, D.C. CT & CBCT imaging. Oral Maxillofac. Surg. Clin. N. Am. 2012, 24, 537–543.
2. Schulze, R.; Heil, U.; Groß, D.; Bruellmann, D.D.; Dranischnikow, E.; Schwanecke, U.; Schoemer, E. Artefacts in CBCT: A review.
Dentomaxillofac. Radiol. 2011, 40, 265–273. [CrossRef]
3. Fu, Y.; Lei, Y.; Liu, Y.; Wang, T.; Curran, W.J.; Liu, T.; Patel, P .; Yang, X. Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) and CT image
registration aided by CBCT-based synthetic CT. In Proceedings of the Medical Imaging 2020: Image Processing, Houston, TX,
USA, 17–20 February 2020.
4. Chen, L.; Liang, X.; Shen, C.; Jiang, S.; Wang, J. Synthetic CT generation from CBCT images via deep learning. Med. Phys. 2020,
47, 1115–1125. [CrossRef]
5. Liu, J.; Yan, H.; Cheng, H.; Liu, J.; Sun, P .; Wang, B.; Mao, R.; Du, C.; Luo, S. CBCT-based synthetic CT generation using generative
adversarial networks with disentangled representation. Quant. Imaging Med. Surg. 2021, 11, 4820. [CrossRef]
6. Zhang, Y.; Ding, S.G.; Gong, X.C.; Yuan, X.X.; Lin, J.F.; Chen, Q.; Li, J.G. Generating synthesized computed tomography from
CBCT using a conditional generative adversarial network for head and neck cancer patients. Technol. Cancer Res. Treat. 2022, 21,
15330338221085358. [CrossRef]
7. Peng, J.; Qiu, R.L.J.; Wynne, J.F.; Chang, C.W.; Pan, S.; Wang, T.; Roper, J.; Liu, T.; Patel, P .R.; Yu, D.S.; et al. CBCT-Based synthetic
CT image generation using conditional denoising diffusion probabilistic model. Med. Phys. 2024, 51, 1847–1859. [CrossRef]
8. Ho, J.; Jain, A.; Abbeel, P . Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2020, 33, 6840–6851.
9. Song, J.; Meng, C.; Ermon, S. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2010.02502.
10. Rombach, R.; Blattmann, A.; Lorenz, D.; Esser, P .; Ommer, B. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, New Orleans, LA, USA, 18–24 June 2022;
pp. 10684–10695.
11. Li, Y.; Shao, H.C.; Liang, X.; Chen, L.; Li, R.; Jiang, S.; Wang, J.; Zhang, Y. Zero-Shot Medical Image Translation via Frequency-
Guided Diffusion Models. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2024, 43, 980–993. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Spadea, M.F.; Maspero, M.; Zaffino, P . Deep learning-based synthetic CT generation in radiotherapy: A review.Med. Phys. 2021,
48, 5316–5334. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Sherwani, M.K.; Gopalakrishnan, S. A systematic literature review: Deep learning techniques for synthetic medical image
generation and their applications in radiotherapy. Front. Radiol. 2024, 4, 1385742. [CrossRef]
14. Altalib, A.; McGregor, S.; Li, C.; Perelli, A. Synthetic CT image generation from CBCT: A Systematic Review. IEEE Trans. Radiat.
Plasma Med. Sci. 2025, 9, 691–707. [CrossRef]
15. Thummerer, A.; Van der Bijl, E.; Galapon, A., Jr.; Verhoeff, J.J.; Langendijk, J.A.; Both, S.; van den Berg, C.N.A.; Maspero, M.
SynthRAD2023 Grand Challenge dataset: Generating synthetic CT for radiotherapy. Med. Phys. 2023, 50, 4664–4674. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
16. Page, M.J.; McKenzie, J.E.; Bossuyt, P .M.; Boutron, I.; Hoffmann, T.C.; Mulrow, C.D.; Shamseer, L.; Tetzlaff, J.M.; Akl, E.A.;
Brennan, S.E.; et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ 2021, 372, n71.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Reitsma, J.B.; Moons, K.G.; Bossuyt, P .M.; Linnet, K. Systematic Reviews of Studies Quantifying the Accuracy of Diagnostic Tests
and Markers. Clin. Chem. 2012, 58, 1534–1545. [CrossRef]
18. Li, Y.; Shao, H.C.; Liang, X.; Chen, L.; Li, R.; Jiang, S.B.; Wang, J.; Zhang, Y. CBCT-to-CT Synthesis Via a CT-Domain Frequency-
Guided Diffusion Model (FGDM). In Proceedings of the AAPM 65th Annual Meeting & Exhibition, Houston, TX, USA, 23–27
July 2023 .
19. Chen, X.; Qiu, R.L.J.; Peng, J.; Shelton, J.W.; Chang, C.W.; Yang, X.; Kesarwala, A.H. CBCT-based synthetic CT image generation
using a diffusion model for CBCT-guided lung radiotherapy. Med. Phys. 2024, 51, 8168–8178. [CrossRef]
20. Chen, X.; Qiu, R.L.J.; Wang, T.; Chang, C.W.; Chen, X.; Shelton, J.W.; Kesarwala, A.H.; Yang, X. Using a patient-specific diffusion
model to generate CBCT-based synthetic CTs for CBCT-guided adaptive radiotherapy. Med. Phys. 2024, 52, 471–480. [CrossRef]
21. Fu, L.J.; Li, X.; Cai, X.D.; Miao, D.; Yao, Y.; Shen, Y.L. Energy-guided diffusion model for CBCT-to-CT synthesis. Comput. Med.
Imaging Graph. 2024, 113, 102344. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Peng, J.; Gao, Y.; Chang, C.W.; Qiu, R.; Wang, T.; Kesarwala, A.; Yang, K.; Scott, J.; Yu, D.; Yang, X. Unsupervised Bayesian
generation of synthetic CT from CBCT using patient-specific score-based prior. Med. Phys. 2025, 52, 2238–2246.
23. Sun, H.; Sun, X.; Li, J.; Zhu, J.; Yang, Z.; Meng, F.; Liu, Y.; Gong, J.; Wang, Z.; Yin, Y.; et al. Pseudo-CT synthesis in adaptive
radiotherapy based on a stacked coarse-to-fine model: Combing diffusion process and spatial-frequency convolutions. Med. Phys.
2024, 51, 8979–8998. [CrossRef]
24. Viar-Hernandez, D.; Manuel Molina-Maza, J.; Pan, S.; Salari, E.; Chang, C.W.; Eidex, Z.; Zhou, J.; Antonio Vera-Sanchez, J.;
Rodriguez-Vila, B.; Malpica, N.; et al. Exploring dual energy CT synthesis in CBCT-based adaptive radiotherapy and proton
therapy: Application of denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Phys. Med. Biol. 2024, 69, 215011. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064


--- PAGE 24 ---

Tomography 2026, 12, 64 24 of 24
25. Yin, S.; Tan, H.; Chong, L.M.; Liu, H.; Liu, H.; Lee, K.H.; Tuan, J.K.L.; Ho, D.; Jin, Y. HC3 L-Diff: Hybrid conditional latent
diffusion with high frequency enhancement for CBCT-to-CT synthesis. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2411.01575.
26. Zhang, Y.; Li, L.; Wang, J.; Yang, X.; Zhou, H.; He, J.; Xie, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Sun, W.; Zhang, X.; et al. Texture-preserving diffusion
model for CBCT-to-CT synthesis. Med. Image Anal. 2024, 99, 103362. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher's Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/tomography12050064
